ISPN-13080 Infnispan SSL encryption and certificate authorization tutorial (#126)
infinispan/infinispan-simple-tutorials: security/tls-authorization/README.adoc

= Remote caches with TLS (SSL) encryption and security authorization

**Authors:** Wolf Fink +
**Technologies:** Infinispan, Hot Rod, Java, SSL/TLS, RBAC +
**Summary:** Use SSL/TLS certificates to verify Hot Rod client identities and encrypt network traffic to the server. This tutorial also demonstrates how to perform client certificate authentication and use security authorization with client certificates.

== Building instructions and preparation

. `$ mvn clean package`
. Build the example certificates and keystores with the following scripts or directly with the Java keytool commands:
* `create_unsigned_certificates.sh`

> * `create_signed_certificates.sh`

Reviewer: @wfink Should we say anything about permissions here or should we make these executable with chmod +x or something?

Author: will change +x

+

> These scripts create keystores and trust stores in the project directory.

Reviewer: @wfink What about a script to clean the filesystem and delete all the .cer and .pfx artifacts?

Author: "git clean" should do the job

Reviewer: yeah, I was also thinking about the server installation. but maybe we should just leave that to users. maybe we should suggest creating a server instance that the user can simply remove after running the tutorial?

. Make sure you are using Java 11 at a minimum.
+
Infinispan Server requires at least Java 11.

> Additionally the example keystores and trust stores in this tutorial use `PKCS12`, which is the recommended standard and the default from Java 11.

Reviewer 2: I'm getting 
```
Warning:
The JKS keystore uses a proprietary format. It is recommended to migrate to PKCS12 which is an industry standard format using "keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore client1_keystore.p12 -destkeystore client1_keystore.p12 -deststoretype pkcs12".
```

Author: This is because you are using Java8 to create the keystore (@oraNod removed the warning from README and added Java11 as required)

. Download and start at least one Infinispan Server instance.

== Unsigned Server certificates

> 

Reviewer: First step should be to "Run `create_unsigned_certificates.sh` to generate a server keystore and client trust store with unsigned certificates."

> . Copy `server-keystore.pfx` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.

Reviewer: Maybe the first step should be to stop the server if it is running. And then add a step after modifying the server identities configuration to instruct users to start the server before creating the cache. 

If you configure the server while it's running the changes don't take effect and the running the client results in error.

. Add the `server-identities` configuration to the Infinispan Server security realm.
+
Note that the default properties realm is removed.
+
[source,xml]
----
<security-realm name="default">
  <server-identities>
    <ssl>
      <keystore path="server-keystore.pfx"
                keystore-password="secret"
                alias="infinispan-server"/>
    </ssl>
  </server-identities>
</security-realm>
----
+
. Create a cache named `secured` with any configuration.
+
[source,xml]
----
<distributed-cache name="secured" mode="SYNC">
  <encoding media-type="application/x-protostream"/>
</distributed-cache>
----
+
. Run the client.
+
[source]
----
$ export TEST=SIMPLE && mvn exec:exec
----

=== Unsigned Server certificates with client authorization

> . Copy `client-keystore.pfx` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Copy `client-truststore.pfx` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.
```

. Configure Infinispan Server to authenticate client certificates by adding `require-ssl-client-auth="true"` to the `endpoints` configuration.
+
[source,xml]
----
<endpoints socket-binding="default"
           security-realm="default"
           require-ssl-client-auth="true"/>
----
+

> . Add the `server-identities` configuration to the Infinispan Server security realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add `client-truststore.pfx` to the `server-identities` configuration in the Infinispan Server security realm.
```

. Include the `<truststore-realm/>` to authenticate certificates, which requires all public client certificates in the trust store.
+
Note that the default properties realm is removed.
+
[source,xml]
----
<security-realm name="default">
  <server-identities>
    <ssl>
      <keystore path="server-keystore.pfx"
                keystore-password="secret"
                alias="infinispan-server"/>
      <truststore path="client-truststore.pfx"
                  password="ClientSecret"/>
    </ssl>
  </server-identities>
  <truststore-realm/>
</security-realm>
----
+

> . Update the security authorization configuration for Infinispan Server to use the Common Name role mapper and define two client roles and associated permissions.

Reviewer: @wfink What do you think about removing the section about authz here? 

You could put the security authz steps at the end of the Signed Certificate part of the tutorial only to avoid some duplication.

If you run the clients after updating the server configuration with the client trust store then it shows client certificate authentication more clearly. I think it would reduce complexity for this tutorial to keep authz to last.

+
In this example `Client1` and `Client2` correspond to the `cn` field in client certificates.
+
[source,xml]
----
<cache-container>
  <security>
    <authorization>
      <common-name-role-mapper/>
      <role name="Client1" permissions="ALL"/>
      <role name="Client2" permissions="READ"/>
    </authorization>
  </security>
</cache-container>
----
+
. Create a cache with security authorization.
+
[source,xml]
----
<distributed-cache name="secured" mode="SYNC">
  <encoding media-type="application/x-protostream"/>
  <security>
    <authorization/>
  <security>
</distributed-cache>
----
+
. Run the clients.
+
[source]
----
$ export TEST=SIMPLEAUTH && mvn exec:exec
----

> 

Reviewer: I do think here it would be nice to say "Run git clean -fx" before moving on to the signed tutorial. That way you don't get keystores mixed up, etc.

== Signed server keystore with client verification

Using certificates signed by a public CA means that Infinispan Server does not need to a trust store that contains all dedicated client certificates.
If client certificates are signed with the public CA certificate, Infinispan Server can trust them.

> 

Reviewer: First step = "Run create_signed_certificates.sh"

**Summary:** Use SSL/TLS certificates to verify Hot Rod client identities and encrypt network traffic to the server. This tutorial also demonstrates how to perform client certificate authentication and use security authorization with client certificates.

== Building instructions and preparation

. Make sure you are using Java 11 at a minimum.
+
Infinispan Server requires at least Java 11.
Additionally the example keystores and trust stores in this tutorial use `PKCS12`, which is the recommended standard and the default from Java 11.
Java8 keytool will prompt for a password which can be prevented by adding `-keypass` to some of the commands. The storetype is already set.
. Run the command to build the project
* `$ mvn clean package`
. Build the example certificates and keystores with the following scripts or directly with the Java keytool commands:
* `create_unsigned_certificates.sh`
* `create_signed_certificates.sh`
+
These scripts create keystores and trust stores in the project directory.
. Download at least one Infinispan Server instance.

== Unsigned Server certificates

. Copy `server-keystore.pfx` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.

> . Copy `server/infinispan-uCert.xml` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.
> . Use the `infinispan-uCert.xml` configuration, changes are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Copy `server/infinispan-uCert.xml` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.
This configuration, `infinispan-uCert.xml`, contains the following changes:
```

Reviewer: Probably better not to make "Use the ... configuration` as a step. This is covered in the start the server step.

+
Note that the default properties realm is removed.
+
[source,xml]
----
<security-realm name="default">
  <server-identities>
    <ssl>
      <keystore path="server-keystore.pfx"
                keystore-password="secret"
                alias="infinispan-server"/>
    </ssl>
  </server-identities>
</security-realm>
----
+
[source,xml]
----
<distributed-cache name="secured" mode="SYNC">
  <encoding media-type="application/x-protostream"/>
</distributed-cache>
----
+
. Start the server.
+
[source]
----
$ `$ISPN_HOME/bin/server.sh -c infinispan-uCert.xml`
----
+
. Run the client.
+
[source]
----
$ export TEST=SIMPLE && mvn exec:exec@run
----
. Check that the put and get succeeds.

=== Unsigned Server certificates with client authorization

. Copy `client-truststore.pfx` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.
. Copy `server/infinispan-uCertAuth.xml` to `$ISPN_HOME/server/conf`.

> . Use the `infinispan-uCertAuth.xml` configuration, changes are

Reviewer: Same comment as above

<security-realm name="default">
  <server-identities>
    <ssl>
      <keystore path="server-keystore.pfx"
                keystore-password="secret"
                alias="infinispan-server"/>
      <truststore path="client-truststore.pfx"
                  password="ClientSecret"/>
    </ssl>
  </server-identities>
  <truststore-realm/>
</security-realm>
----
+
[source,xml]
----
<cache-container>
  <security>
    <authorization>
      <common-name-role-mapper/>
      <!-- In this example `Client1` and `Client2` correspond to the `cn` field in client certificates -->
      <role name="Client1" permissions="ALL"/>
      <role name="Client2" permissions="READ"/>
    </authorization>
  </security>
</cache-container>
----
+
[source,xml]
----
<distributed-cache name="secured" mode="SYNC">
  <encoding media-type="application/x-protostream"/>
  <security>
    <authorization/>
  <security>
</distributed-cache>
----
+
. Start the server.
+
[source]
----
$ `$ISPN_HOME/bin/server.sh -c infinispan-uCertAuth.xml`
----
+
. Run the client.
+
[source]
----
$ export TEST=SIMPLEAUTH && mvn exec:exec@run
----
. Check that put and get succeeds both times as Client1 and Client2 certificates are used.

> 

Reviewer: Got this exception in logs: 

ISPN005003: Exception reported java.lang.SecurityException: ISPN000287: Unauthorized access: subject 'Subject with principal(s): [anonymous, CN=Client2, OU=Infinispan, O=JBoss, L=Red Hat, InetAddressPrincipal [address=127.0.0.1/127.0.0.1]]' lacks 'WRITE' permission

If this is expected, we should explain to users.
